Amendments to Hyperledger Fabric Technical Charter (#5223)
hyperledger/fabric: Hyperledger_Fabric_Technical_Charter.md

1.  **Mission and Scope of the Project**

    1.  The mission of the Project is to build platforms for distributed ledger solutions underpinned by a modular architecture delivering high degrees of confidentiality, resiliency, flexibility, and scalability.

    2.  The scope of the Project includes collaborative development under the Project License (as defined herein) supporting the mission. This encompasses:

        1.  The development and maintenance of one or more distinct **Sub-Projects**.

        2.  Documentation, testing, integration, and the creation of other artifacts that aid the development, deployment, operation, or adoption of these **Sub-Projects** and the overall ecosystem.

>         3.  Establishing and managing the governance framework for the ecosystem, including processes for recognizing new **Sub-Projects**.

Reviewer: optional suggestion - it would be better this way->
Establishment and management of the governance framework for the ecosystem, including processes for recognizing new **Sub-Projects**.

Author: Thanks, @ronodhirSoumik, for the suggestion. The LFDT legal team is currently reviewing the charter and making some final edits. Please have a look when an update is pushed.

        2.  **Sub-Project Collective Vote Determination:**
            
            1. Each active Sub-Project contributes one collective vote (approve/disapprove) to an ecosystem-wide decision. This vote is determined by the TSC Members affiliated with that Sub-Project.
            
            2. **Internal Voting Eligibility:** Only the TSC Members affiliated with the Sub-Project are eligible to vote in the internal process that determines the Sub-Project's collective stance.

            3. **Internal Decision Mechanism:** Typically, a **Sub-Project's** collective vote is 'approve' if a majority of its participating affiliated TSC members vote to approve the proposal; otherwise, its collective vote is 'disapprove'. Alternatively, the **Sub-Project** may use its own documented procedures for its affiliated TSC members to determine its collective vote (approve/disapprove).

        3.  **Submission & Tally:** Each group of TSC Members affiliated with a Sub-Project submits their Sub-Project's collective vote to the overall TSC.

>         4. **Adoption & Announcement:** A proposal is adopted if approved by at least fifty percent of active Sub-Projects (based on their collective votes). The TSC tallies these collective votes and announces the outcome.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **Adoption & Announcement:** A proposal is adopted if it receives:
   i. Approval from at least fifty percent of active Sub-Projects, AND
   ii. No explicit objections from any participating Sub-Project
   
Abstentions are permitted and do not count as objections. The TSC tallies these collective votes and announces the outcome.```

Reviewer 2: The current simple majority threshold (50%+) is insufficient for ecosystem governance and vulnerable to hostile control. Consider this scenario:

Current System: With 10 Sub-Projects, a proposal passes with 6 "Yes" votes, even if 4 vote "No"
Problem: A coordinated group controlling 6 Sub-Projects can force through any decision despite significant opposition

Author: @C0rWin the charter can always be amended. I am sure that new sub projects are not going to be added very often. Especially, when we have 10 sub-projects, we may need to conduct elections 

As @denyeart already pointed out, 50%+ is what followed in LFDT.

    2.  The scope of the Project includes collaborative development under the Project License (as defined herein) supporting the mission. This encompasses:

        1.  The development and maintenance of one or more distinct **Sub-Projects**.

        2.  Documentation, testing, integration, and the creation of other artifacts that aid the development, deployment, operation, or adoption of these **Sub-Projects** and the overall ecosystem.

        3.  Establishing and managing the governance framework for the ecosystem, including processes for recognizing new **Sub-Projects**.

2.  **Technical Steering Committee**

    1.  The Technical Steering Committee (the “TSC”), also referred to as the Ecosystem TSC, will be responsible for facilitating the governance and providing overarching technical coordination for the open source Project and its ecosystem of **Sub-Projects**. Its decisions on key ecosystem-wide matters are made according to the voting procedures in Section 4.

>     2.  **TSC Composition:** The TSC voting members are initially those **Sub-Project Maintainers** from certain foundational **Sub-Projects**. Initial TSC voting members are those listed in the MAINTAINERS file in the `fabric` repository ([https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md](https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md)) and those in the `fabric-gateway` repository ([https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric-gateway/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md](https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric-gateway/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md)). Once a new **Sub-Project** is approved (as per Section 4) and its required repositories are created, the TSC voting membership can be expanded to include designated **Sub-Project Maintainers** from this new **Sub-Project**. The initial inclusion of maintainers from a newly recognized **Sub-Project** may be approved by an existing TSC member. For subsequent changes to a **Sub-Project's** representation on the TSC, for example adding all maintainers of a new repository within a Sub-Project to the TSC, a simple majority approval from the respective existing TSC from the specified Sub-Project is required. The TSC may also, by a decision made under the terms of Section 4, choose an alternative approach for determining the voting members of the TSC, and any such alternative approach (together with a list of then-current TSC voting members) will be documented in the MAINTAINERS files or a similar publicly accessible document. Any meetings of the Technical Steering Committee are intended to be open to the public, and can be conducted electronically, via teleconference, or in person.

Reviewer 3: `The initial inclusion of maintainers from a newly recognized **Sub-Project** may be approved by an existing TSC member.` 

What is the majority required for the initial inclusion of sub-project maintainers into the "big" TSC?

`For subsequent changes to a **Sub-Project's** representation on the TSC, for example adding all maintainers of a new repository within a Sub-Project to the TSC, a simple majority approval from the respective existing TSC from the specified Sub-Project is required.`

This text is a bit vague, that is, it may imply that the members of the sub-project in the TSC unilaterally decide to add their sub-project maintainers to the TSC (dilute the representation of other subprojects). I assume that is not the case?
I think a clarification is needed here.

Author: > What is the majority required for the initial inclusion of sub-project maintainers into the TSC?

We already do voting on the RFC. Hence, adding maintainers of the new sub-project shouldn't have to go over another round of voting. Hence, any existing TSC member can approve the initial set of maintainers.

> This text is a bit vague, that is, it may imply that the members of the sub-project in the TSC unilaterally decide to add their sub-project maintainers to the TSC (dilute the representation of other subprojects). I assume that is not the case? I think a clarification is needed here.

This charter gives equal power to each sub-project whether it has 10 maintainers or 100 maintainers. The voting section ensures that.

    2.  **Quorum for Sub-Project Maintainer Group Votes:** For a **Sub-Project's** Maintainer group to cast its collective vote on an ecosystem-wide matter, a simple majority of its **Sub-Project Maintainers** who are part of TSC must participate in its internal decision-making process, as defined by that group's procedures or, in absence thereof, by simple majority vote.

    3.  **Decision-Making on Significant Ecosystem-Wide Matters:** Decisions on significant ecosystem-wide matters shall require approval from a simple majority of the distinct Maintainer groups of currently recognized and active **Sub-Projects**. The process is as follows:

        1.  A proposal for an ecosystem-wide decision is brought before the TSC for discussion and refinement.

        2.  If the TSC deems the matter requires a formal vote under this section, it will be put to the Maintainer groups of all currently recognized and active **Sub-Projects**.

        3.  Each such **Sub-Project's** Maintainer group shall determine its collective approval or disapproval of the proposal via its own internal voting process (a simple majority vote of its active members).

>         4.  Each **Sub-Project's** Maintainer group then signals its single collective decision (approve/disapprove) to the TSC.

Reviewer 3: I see a potential problem with this rule. A tiny unimportant sub-project has equal vote to all others, possibly more successful and more active, with sub-TSCs that are bigger. Kind of like in the US senate, a tiny state has same power as big one.

Alternative is to vote in the big TSC every time a maintainer from a sub-project is added to it, controlling that a sub-project won't dilute the rest. Then require a uniform vote from a supermajority of the big-TSC. This way less active projects have less power. This has the problem that an active sub-project may overrun the less active ones.

Maybe a combination of both? for a select number of important decisions?

Reviewer 3: Another question - a person may be a maintainer of more than one sub-project; clearly define that he can cast his vote in both.

Author: > I see a potential problem with this rule. A tiny unimportant sub-project has equal vote to all others, possibly more successful and more active, with sub-TSCs that are bigger. Kind of like in the US senate, a tiny state has same power as big one.

> Alternative is to vote in the big TSC every time a maintainer from a sub-project is added to it, controlling that a sub-project won't dilute the rest. Then require a uniform vote from a supermajority of the big-TSC. This way less active projects have less power. This has the problem that an active sub-project may overrun the less active ones.

The charter gives equal importance to each sub-project, regardless of whether a sub-project has 10 maintainers or 100. Each sub-project has only one vote on ecosystem-level decisions. Otherwise, a sub-project could intentionally add a large number of maintainers to take control of the ecosystem.

An alternative model is an election similar to the one conducted in LFDT to form the TSC from each project. Here, the size of a project is determined by the code contributors of the project. I do not think we need that now. When the number of sub-projects grow, we can change this charter to address this.

        5.  The TSC tallies these group decisions. If the required simple majority of group approvals is met, the proposal is considered adopted by the ecosystem.

        6.  Matters requiring this vote include, but are not limited to:

            1.  Formal acceptance and recognition of a new **Sub-Project** into the ecosystem.

            2.  Archiving or sunsetting an existing recognized **Sub-Project**.

            3.  Making significant changes to any TSC-defined core principles or guidelines.

            4.  Adopting or significantly changing other ecosystem-wide policies.

>     4.  Amendments to this Charter: Amendments to this Technical Charter (as per Section 10) shall require a **supermajority** vote of the distinct Sub-Project Maintainer groups.

Reviewer 3: Supermajority is not well defined (e.g. some parliaments require 80%); It can be anything. We need an initial value, say e.g. 2/3 and how to round fractions (up or down).

Author: Good point. Fixed.

>     5.  Role of the TSC: The TSC is responsible for facilitating this voting process, formally defining criteria for a **Sub-Project** to be considered "active" and thus eligible to participate, setting the precise majority threshold, ratifying the outcomes of these votes, and documenting all such decisions.

Reviewer 3: We have to start with an initial threshold; if this is ratified we have no definition of super-majority

Author: Added a separate Definition section.

6. **Compliance with Policies** 

    1. This Charter is subject to the Series Agreement for the Project and the Operating Agreement of LF Projects. Contributors will comply with the policies of LF Projects as may be adopted and amended by LF Projects, including, without limitation the policies listed at [https://lfprojects.org/policies/](https://lfprojects.org/policies/).  

    2. The TSC may adopt a code of conduct (“CoC”) for the Project, which is subject to approval by the Series Manager.  In the event that a Project-specific CoC has not been approved, the LF Projects Code of Conduct listed at [https://lfprojects.org/policies](https://lfprojects.org/policies) will apply for all Collaborators in the Project.

    3. When amending or adopting any policy applicable to the Project, LF Projects will publish such policy, as to be amended or adopted, on its web site at least 30 days prior to such policy taking effect; provided, however, that in the case of any amendment of the Trademark Policy or Terms of Use of LF Projects, any such amendment is effective upon publication on LF Project’s web site.

>     4. All Collaborators must allow open participation from any individual or organization meeting the requirements for contributing under this Charter and any policies adopted for all Collaborators by the TSC, regardless of competitive interests. Put another way,

Reviewer 3: This is incomplete

Author: Fixed.

**Technical Charter (the “Charter”)**
**for**
**Hyperledger Fabric a Series of LF Projects, LLC**

**Adopted May 21, 2025**

> This Charter sets forth the responsibilities and procedures for technical contribution to, and oversight of, the Hyperledger Fabric ecosystem of open source projects, which has been established as Hyperledger Fabric a Series of LF Projects, LLC (the “Project”). LF Projects, LLC (“LF Projects”) is a Delaware series limited liability company. All contributors (including committers, maintainers, and other technical positions) and other participants in the Project (collectively, “Collaborators”) must comply with the terms of this Charter.

Reviewer 4: The original text was fine, it is still a 'project' at the highest level.

Author: Done.

1.  **Mission and Scope of the Project**

>     1.  The mission of the Project is to host and promote a vibrant ecosystem of different **Sub-Projects** related to Hyperledger Fabric. These **Sub-Projects** aim to provide solutions and components underpinned by a modular architecture delivering high degrees of confidentiality, resiliency, flexibility, and scalability, tailored to diverse use cases.

Reviewer 4: The high level mission could remain the same, with perhaps changing 'a platform' to 'platforms'.

Author: Done.

    2.  The scope of the Project includes collaborative development under the Project License (as defined herein) supporting the mission. This encompasses:

        1.  The development and maintenance of one or more distinct **Sub-Projects**.

        2.  Documentation, testing, integration, and the creation of other artifacts that aid the development, deployment, operation, or adoption of these **Sub-Projects** and the overall ecosystem.

        3.  Establishing and managing the governance framework for the ecosystem, including processes for recognizing new **Sub-Projects**.

2.  Definitions

>     1. **Simple Majority:** A "Simple Majority" vote is achieved when the number of affirmative votes meets or exceeds the mathematical ceiling of half of the total number of eligible voting members or groups participating in a vote where a quorum is met (e.g., for 4 participating groups, ⌈4/2⌉=2 affirmative votes are required; for 5 participating groups, ⌈5/2⌉=3 affirmative votes are required).

Reviewer 5: This seems to be a change from the previous definition since it considers exactly half of the votes as a majority. A [majority](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Majority) means "more than half".

>     2. **Super Majority:** A "Super Majority" vote is achieved when the number of affirmative votes meets or exceeds the mathematical ceiling of two-thirds of the total number of eligible voting members or groups participating in a vote where a quorum is met (e.g., for 4 participating groups, ⌈2/3×4⌉=3 affirmative votes are required).

Reviewer 5: I would prefer to keep the the original terminology of "majority" and "two thirds vote". I find them far simpler and equally clear. It would also remove the need to add this **Definitions** section, which is uses the term "quorum" without including a definition for it.

3.  **Technical Steering Committee**

    1.  The Technical Steering Committee (the “TSC”), also referred to as the Ecosystem TSC, will be responsible for facilitating the governance and providing overarching technical coordination for the open source Project and its ecosystem of **Sub-Projects**. Its decisions on key ecosystem-wide matters are made according to the voting procedures in Section 5.

>     2.  **TSC Composition:** The TSC voting members are initially those **Sub-Project Maintainers** from certain foundational **Sub-Projects**. Initial TSC voting members are those listed in the MAINTAINERS file in the `fabric` repository ([https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md](https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md)) and those in the `fabric-gateway` repository ([https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric-gateway/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md](https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric-gateway/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md)). Once a new **Sub-Project** is approved (as per Section 5) and its required repositories are created, the TSC voting membership can be expanded to include designated **Sub-Project Maintainers** from this new **Sub-Project**. The initial inclusion of maintainers from a newly recognized **Sub-Project** may be approved by an existing TSC member. For subsequent changes to a **Sub-Project's** representation on the TSC, for example adding all maintainers of a new repository within a Sub-Project to the TSC, a simple majority approval from the respective existing TSC from the specified Sub-Project is required. The TSC may also, by a decision made under the terms of Section 5, choose an alternative approach for determining the voting members of the TSC, and any such alternative approach (together with a list of then-current TSC voting members) will be documented in the MAINTAINERS files or a similar publicly accessible document. Any meetings of the Technical Steering Committee are intended to be open to the public, and can be conducted electronically, via teleconference, or in person.

Reviewer 2: > The initial inclusion of maintainers from a newly recognized Sub-Project may be approved by an existing TSC member

Requires only ONE TSC member's approval for new Sub-Project maintainers to join the TSC. This is an extremely low threshold that enables rapid TSC expansion by coordinated groups.

Author: We already conduct a vote to approve a sub-project. Hence, immediately, there is no need for another round of votes to add the initial maintainers.

Reviewer 2: It's not about adding maintainers it's about extending the TSC.

Author: When a sub-project is approved, it means extended TSC.

Reviewer 2: So I do not think this should be the case, sub-project approved, this is fine, extends TSC should be done with majority voting, exactly like accepting maintainers. 

In your view, is the Fabric TSC equal to the list of all sub-project maintainers? Or is this an entity that governs the sub-projects?

Author: I have explained this in line 31. 

Initial TSC voting members are those listed in the MAINTAINERS file in the `fabric` repository ([https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md](https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md)) and those in the `fabric-gateway` repository ([https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric-gateway/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md](https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric-gateway/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md)).

Not all maintainers in all repositories in a sub-project would be part of TSC. This will be decided by the individual sub-projects. Whether they have 2 maintainers or 100 maintainers do not matter. All sub-projects have equal rights for now. It is subject to change in the future.

Reviewer 5: This section is not very clear to me either. Is the following statement redundant since to be a sub-project there has already been a vote passed to approve the sub-project, or does it mean something else? Why is there another approval by any existing TSC member?

> The initial inclusion of maintainers from a newly recognized **Sub-Project** may be approved by an existing TSC member

As you correctly say in the comment above, not all maintainers of Fabric-related repositories are currently TSC members. It is not clear to me from this section exactly who is automatically a TSC member when a new sub-project is added. All maintainers of the some or all of the sub-project repositories, regardless of how many maintainers there are? Or does that discussion happen as part of the sub-project acceptance?

Author: @bestbeforetoday Does the following make it clear? If so, I can make the changes. 

**Initial TSC Members:** The TSC starts with maintainers from two foundational repositories:
   - Those listed in the fabric repository MAINTAINERS file - (https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md)
   - Those listed in the fabric-gateway repository MAINTAINERS file (https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric-gateway/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md)

**Adding New Members:** When a new Sub-Project joins the ecosystem:

 - Its repository maintainers can become TSC members. Which repository maintainers will be added is specified in the RFC of the proposed Sub-Project
 - Any current TSC member can approve their initial inclusion since the RFC for the proposed Sub-Project has already gone through the voting process

**When adding more maintainers from an existing Sub-Project:**
- The existing TSC members from that Sub-Project must approve by majority vote

>     3.  **Roles within the Ecosystem:** The Project ecosystem generally will involve Contributors and **Sub-Project Maintainers**. The TSC may adopt or modify roles so long as the roles are documented by the TSC. Unless otherwise documented:

Reviewer 5: My reading of if the original section is that it describes expected roles within any repository governed by the TSC. I am not sure it really needs to change. It certainly seems less clear to me now. Assuming my interpretation of the original section is correct, maybe the wording can just be lightly modified to clarify that it relates to repository roles?

    4.  Participation in the Project through becoming a Contributor and **Sub-Project Maintainer** is open to anyone so long as they abide by the terms of this Charter.

    5.  The TSC may (1) establish workflow procedures for the submission, approval, and closure/archiving of recognized **Sub-Projects** (subject to the voting rules in Section 5), (2) set ecosystem-wide minimum requirements or guidelines for the promotion of Contributors to **Sub-Project Maintainer** status (while allowing individual **Sub-Projects** to define more specific criteria), and (3) amend, adjust, refine and/or eliminate ecosystem-level roles, and create new roles, and publicly document any TSC roles and the roles and responsibilities of **Sub-Project Maintainers**, as it sees fit.

    6.  The TSC may elect a TSC Chair, who will preside over meetings of the TSC and will serve until their resignation or replacement by a TSC decision (as per Section 5). The TSC Chair, or any other TSC member so designated by the TSC, will serve as the primary communication contact between the Project and Hyperledger Foundation, a directed fund of The Linux Foundation.

>     7.  **Responsibilities:** The TSC will be responsible for all aspects of oversight relating to the Project, which may include:

Reviewer 5: This section in general seems to mix the terms project, sub-project and repository a lot. Maybe "Project" here now means "Fabric ecosystem"? There is existing wording below talking about "sub-projects", but this (I think) relates to repositories, not "Sub-projects" that we have now defined to be different implementations or specializations of the Fabric blockchain model.

Author: This section existed in the earlier charter. Hence, I just retained them.

        1.  coordinating the technical direction of the Project;

        2.  approving project or system proposals (including, but not limited to, archiving and changing a sub-project’s scope);

        3.  organizing sub-projects and removing sub-projects;

        4.  creating sub-committees or working groups to focus on cross-project technical issues and requirements;

        5.  appointing representatives to work with other open source or open standards communities;

        6.  establishing community norms, workflows, issuing releases, and security issue reporting policies;

        7.  approving and implementing policies and processes for contributing (to be published in the CONTRIBUTING file) and coordinating with the series manager of the Project (as provided for in the Series Agreement, the “Series Manager”) to resolve matters or concerns that may arise as set forth in Section 8 of this Charter;

        8.  discussions, seeking consensus, and where necessary, voting on technical matters relating to the code base that affect multiple projects; and

        9.  coordinating any marketing, events, or communications regarding the Project.

4.  **Sub-Project Maintainers**

>     1.  **Definition:** Each officially recognized **Sub-Project** within the ecosystem shall have its own group of **Sub-Project Maintainers** (hereinafter "Maintainers"). These Maintainers are the individuals who can be members of the TSC as per Section 3.2.

Reviewer 4: The focus on sub-projects loses the fact that repositories within a sub-project can have different sets of maintainers. I would be fine if we kept maintainers only at the sub-project level going forward however, as that would make things easier. I'm not sure if that is what you were suggesting.

Author: I have updated the TSC formation to address this issue.

    4.  **Selection and Removal:** The process for adding or removing Maintainers for a specific **Sub-Project** will be defined by that **Sub-Project's** community and its existing Maintainers, following established Hyperledger best practices for meritocracy and transparency, and subject to any minimum guidelines set by the TSC. New **Sub-Projects**, upon approval under Section 5, will propose their initial set of Maintainers.

5.  **Voting on Ecosystem-Wide Decisions**

    1.  **General Principle:** While the Project aims to operate by seeking consensus among Collaborators and relevant Maintainer groups, certain significant ecosystem-wide decisions require a formal voting process to ensure broad support and maintain the integrity of the Hyperledger Fabric ecosystem.

    2.  **Quorum for Sub-Project Maintainer Group Votes:** For a **Sub-Project's** Maintainer group to cast its collective vote on an ecosystem-wide matter, a simple majority of its **Sub-Project Maintainers** who are part of TSC must participate in its internal decision-making process, as defined by that group's procedures or, in absence thereof, by simple majority vote.

>     3.  **Decision-Making on Significant Ecosystem-Wide Matters:** Decisions on significant ecosystem-wide matters shall require approval from a simple majority of the distinct Maintainer groups of currently recognized and active **Sub-Projects**. The process is as follows:

Reviewer 2: This creates a feedback loop where once a coordinated group controls >50% of Sub-Projects, they can easily approve new Sub-Projects to maintain/increase their control, which I think should be avoided.

Author: Are you suggesting super majority for accepting a new sub-project?

Reviewer 2: yes

Author: @denyeart has suggested simple majority. Hence, I would like to hear from all other maintainers to before making the decision. Otherwise, i will have change continuously.

Reviewer 2: Ecosystem-wide matters should not be decided with a simple majority, cause we need to make sure all sides involved and that might be affected by the system-wide change are represented.

Author: We can simply agree to disagree. LFDT uses simple majority voting methods for most cases. I do not want to overly restrict things.

Reviewer 2: Look, the current Charter clearly states there is a need for a super majority to vote for the Charter's changes, why do you think we need to make it weaker?

Author: I didn't change that part in this PR. Please refer to line 105. 

Note that it can be changed too if this PR can get super majority vote. The charter does not say it can never be changed. Anyway, I didn't change this. 

Only for approving new sub-project, this charter says simple majority is adequate. If you disagree, I respect your stance.

        1.  A proposal for an ecosystem-wide decision is brought before the TSC for discussion and refinement.

        2.  If the TSC deems the matter requires a formal vote under this section, it will be put to the Maintainer groups of all currently recognized and active **Sub-Projects**.

        3.  Each such **Sub-Project's** Maintainer group shall determine its collective approval or disapproval of the proposal via its own internal voting process (a simple majority vote of its active members).

        4.  Each **Sub-Project's** Maintainer group then signals its single collective decision (approve/disapprove) to the TSC.

>         5.  The TSC tallies these group decisions. If the required simple majority of group approvals is met, the proposal is considered adopted by the ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: Each Sub-Project gets exactly one vote regardless of size, importance, or activity. A minimal documentation project has equal power to the core Fabric blockchain. This incentivizes fragmentation over collaboration.

Author: I am sure that a minimal documentation project would not be considered a sub-project. Note that a sub-project is a family of repositories. Documentation, utilities, and tools for a given sub-project would be created as repositories within that sub-project. There is no need to vote on these. Whether a work deserves sub-project status or should just be another repository within an existing sub-project would be decided by the voting mechanism when such proposal is put out.

Reviewer 2: ok, then it has to be clearly defined.

Author: Even LFDT documents are very general. It will be decided by TSC on case by case. During voting, we need to analyze whether a proposal warrants a sub-project or not. The voting will decide the fate. I would like to hear opinions of other maintainers too to avoid repetitive changes.

Reviewer 2: The LFDT does not have such precedence so far, and as you mentioned, we are evolving the Fabric's Charter to the next level, hence let's make it the least robust and clear definitions.

Author: Even LFDT have simple majority voting methods only. Refer to section 6 in this charter https://lf-decentralized-trust.github.io/governance/governing-documents/charter.html.

        6.  Matters requiring this vote include, but are not limited to:

>             1.  Formal acceptance and recognition of a new **Sub-Project** into the ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: No mention of minimum viability criteria, community size requirements, or strategic value assessment. Any project, regardless of merit or genuine need, can potentially become a voting Sub-Project.

Author: For now, yes. When the number of sub-projects grow, we would come back to change this charter.

Reviewer 2: This is the right time to showcase the example of these criteria, given that we will be applying those changes to judge the acceptance of the Fabric-X RFC. For instance we can think of something like:

## **Proposed Sub-Project Viability Requirements**

Here are initial suggestions for minimum viability criteria that could be added to Section 5.3.6.1:

### **Technical Viability Requirements**

```markdown
5.3.6.1.a **Technical Viability Standards:**
A proposed Sub-Project must demonstrate:

i. **Substantial Codebase**: Minimum 1,000 lines of meaningful code OR 
   significant documentation project with 50+ pages of original content

ii. **Active Development**: At least 12 commits from 3+ different contributors 
    over the past 6 months

iii. **Quality Standards**: 
    - Automated testing with >70% code coverage
    - Clear README with installation/usage instructions
    - Documented API or user interface

iv. **Licensing Compliance**: All code properly licensed under Project License 
    with appropriate DCO sign-offs
```

### **Community Requirements**

```markdown
5.3.6.1.b **Community Standards:**
A proposed Sub-Project must have:

i. **Contributor Diversity**: Minimum 5 active contributors from at least 
   3 different organizations over the past 12 months

ii. **Community Engagement**: Evidence of external usage through:
    - 25+ GitHub stars OR
    - 10+ external issues/PRs OR
    - 5+ documented external deployments/integrations

iii. **Maintainer Commitment**: Proposed maintainers must demonstrate:
    - 6+ months of consistent contribution to Hyperledger projects
    - Commitment to maintain project for minimum 2 years
    - Response time SLA for security issues (<72 hours)
```

### **Strategic Value Assessment**

```markdown
5.3.6.1.c **Ecosystem Strategic Value:**
A proposed Sub-Project must demonstrate:

i. **Unique Value Proposition**: Clear differentiation from existing 
   Sub-Projects with documented gap analysis

ii. **Fabric Ecosystem Alignment**: Direct integration with or extension of 
   Hyperledger Fabric capabilities, NOT standalone projects

iii. **Market Demand**: Evidence of genuine need through:
    - Community RFC with 10+ supporter endorsements OR
    - Integration requests from 3+ enterprise users OR
    - Technical roadmap item from existing Sub-Project

iv. **Non-Competition**: Does not duplicate existing Sub-Project functionality 
    without compelling technical justification
```

### **Governance and Sustainability**

```markdown
5.3.6.1.d **Governance Requirements:**
A proposed Sub-Project must provide:

i. **Conflict of Interest Declaration**: All proposed maintainers must 
   declare organizational affiliations and potential conflicts

ii. **Sustainability Plan**: 
    - Documented funding/resource commitment for 2+ years
    - Succession planning for key maintainer roles
    - Integration plan with broader Fabric ecosystem

iii. **Activity Commitment**: Agreement to maintain minimum activity levels:
    - Monthly maintainer meeting participation
    - Quarterly progress reports to TSC
    - Annual security audit completion

iv. **Exit Strategy**: Documented plan for project archival or merger 
    if activity falls below thresholds
```

### **Approval Process Enhancement**

```markdown
5.3.6.1.e **Enhanced Approval Process:**

i. **Two-Phase Approval**:
   - Phase 1: Technical review by TSC technical committee
   - Phase 2: Strategic review and vote by Sub-Project maintainer groups

ii. **Supermajority Requirement**: New Sub-Project approval requires 
   2/3 supermajority (not simple majority) of existing Sub-Project groups

iii. **Incubation Period**: 6-month probationary period where new 
   Sub-Project has observer status but no voting rights

iv. **Appeal Process**: Rejected proposals can appeal to Series Manager 
   with additional evidence
```

### **Ongoing Compliance Monitoring**

```markdown
5.3.6.1.f **Continuing Viability Requirements:**

i. **Annual Review**: All Sub-Projects must demonstrate continued compliance 
   with viability standards annually

ii. **Activity Thresholds**: Sub-Projects must maintain:
   - 12+ commits per year from 2+ contributors
   - Response to critical security issues within 72 hours
   - Participation in TSC ecosystem meetings (75% attendance)

iii. **Automatic Sunset**: Sub-Projects failing to meet thresholds for 
   12 consecutive months automatically lose voting rights

iv. **Rehabilitation Process**: Sunset Sub-Projects can regain voting rights 
   by demonstrating renewed compliance for 6+ months
```

### **Anti-Gaming Provisions**

```markdown
5.3.6.1.g **Anti-Manipulation Safeguards:**

i. **Organizational Limits**: Maximum 2 Sub-Projects per organization can 
   have voting rights simultaneously

ii. **Maintainer Diversity**: No single individual can be primary maintainer 
   of more than 2 voting Sub-Projects

iii. **Artificial Splitting Prohibition**: Projects cannot be artificially 
   split to gain additional voting power

iv. **Related Project Grouping**: Closely related projects may be required 
   to merge or coordinate their votes
```

These requirements would significantly raise the bar for Sub-Project creation while still allowing legitimate innovation, making the proliferation attack much more difficult and expensive to execute.

Reviewer 2: Note, this is just an example to start with. Obviously, we can accommodate the current required level.

Author: I am not sure whether charter is a specification document. It has to be general. I do not see such specific and hard restrictions even in the LFDT rules. We can simply cite LFDT rules and follow them. I would like to hear opinions from other maintainers too.

Reviewer 5: @C0rWin Skimming through your suggested viability requirements for a new sub-project above, it seems that it would be impossible for anything to be accepted as a sub-project that is not already a well established open source project. I do not think this is at all reasonable.

I am not convinced that defining such strict and comprehensive metrics is helpful either. My feeling is that potential sub-projects should be judged on their merits rather than an arbitrary set of metrics.

            2.  Archiving or sunsetting an existing recognized **Sub-Project**.

            3.  Making significant changes to any TSC-defined core principles or guidelines.

            4.  Adopting or significantly changing other ecosystem-wide policies.

>     4.  Amendments to this Charter: Amendments to this Technical Charter (as per Section 11) shall require supermajority votes (a ceiling of two-thirds) of the distinct Sub-Project Maintainer groups.

Reviewer 2: While charter amendments require supermajority, the definition is incomplete. With enough Sub-Projects, even this protection could be overcome.

>     4.  Amendments to this Charter: Amendments to this Technical Charter (as per Section 11) shall require supermajority votes (a ceiling of two-thirds) of the distinct Sub-Project Maintainer groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    4.  Amendments to this Charter: Amendments to this Technical Charter (as per Section 11) shall require supermajority votes (a ceiling of two-thirds) of the distinct Sub-Project Maintainer groups and is subject to approval by LF Projects.
```

>     5.  Role of the TSC: The TSC is responsible for facilitating this voting process, formally defining criteria for a **Sub-Project** to be considered "active" and thus eligible to participate, setting the precise majority threshold, ratifying the outcomes of these votes, and documenting all such decisions.

Reviewer 2: > formally defining criteria for a Sub-Project to be considered 'active' and thus eligible to participate

Without clear, measurable activity requirements, shell projects can maintain voting rights indefinitely. The TSC is given discretion but no mandatory standards.

Author: We need to create a separate documents to list these rules. I am not sure charter is the place to do.

Reviewer 2: Without it, this is quite vague and subject to free interpretation, I think if we to define something like this we should do it rigour.

Author: As far as I know, charter has to be generic and not too restrictive. Most decisions will be take using the voting rules specified in the charter on case by case. Charter should not be treated as law or specification document. I would like to hear opinion from other maintainers.

Reviewer 2: The charter should not leave ambiguous definitions or statements, let's not do it restrictively, but also not make it too open to various interpretations.

Author: It is not a specification. Please read the LFDT charter.

        1. coordinating collaboration among Sub-projects, including development of an overall technical vision for the community;

        2. approving new, and archiving existing, Sub-projects;

        3. coordinating any marketing, events, or communications regarding the Project;

        4. creating, maintaining and amending project lifecycle procedures and processes for Sub-projects; and

        5. such other matters related to the technical role of the EC.

    2. Any project accepted for inclusion within the Project as a Sub-project must first complete, prior to becoming a Sub-project, any project contribution documentation that will assign the project name to LF Projects, LLC and other project assets to the Project.

    3. The voting members of the EC consist of the Chair of the TSC of each Sub-project. 

    4. EC meetings are intended to be open to the public. The EC will designate one voting member to serve as a communication contact with LF Decentralized Trust, a directed fund of The Linux Foundation.

>     5. As of July 22, 2025, the initial Sub-projects of the Project and their respective Technical Steering Committees (TSCs) are those named and listed in the GOVERNANCE.MD file.

Reviewer 5: I don't see a `GOVERNANCE.MD` file. Where does that live?

Author: Added

3. **Technical Steering Committees**

    1. A Technical Steering Committee (each, a “TSC”) will be responsible for all technical oversight of each Sub-project. Each Sub-Project has its own TSC.

>     2. Each TSC may choose an alternative approach for determining the voting members of the applicable TSC, and any such alternative approach (together with a list of then-current TSC voting members) will be documented in the MAINTAINERS files.  TSC meetings are intended to be open to the public, and can be conducted electronically, via teleconference, or in person. 

Reviewer 5: This is slightly different to the current set of Fabric TSC members. Perhaps this document should coexist alongside the existing Fabric technical charter rather than replace it?

        3. appointing representatives to work with other open source or open standards communities;

        4. establishing community norms, workflows, issuing releases, and security issue reporting policies; and

        5. approving and implementing policies and processes for contributing (to be published in the CONTRIBUTING file) and coordinating with the series manager of the Project (as provided for in the Series Agreement, the “Series Manager”) to resolve matters or concerns that may arise as set forth in Section 7 of this Charter.

4. **EC/TSC Voting**

    1. While the Project aims to operate as a consensus-based community, if any decision of any TSC or EC requires a vote to move the matter  forward, the voting members of the EC or a TSC, as applicable, will vote on a one vote per voting member basis.

    2. Quorum for EC and TSC meetings requires at least fifty percent of all voting members of the EC or a TSC, as applicable, to be present. The EC or a TSC, as applicable, may continue to meet if quorum is not met but will be prevented from making any decisions at the meeting.

>     3. Except as provided in Section 8.c. and 9.a, decisions by vote at a meeting require a majority vote of those in attendance, provided quorum is met. Decisions made by electronic vote without a meeting require a majority vote of all voting members of the TSC.

Reviewer 5: When rendered in GitHub, section 8.c appears as 8.iii (a.k.a. 8.3), and 9.a appears as 9.i (a.k.a. 9.1). This is particularly confusing as there is also a section that renders as 8.ii.c, which this clearly does not refer to.

Reviewer 3: true, it should be changed to 8.iii and 9.i
